[[chapter:Simple_Graphical_User_Interfaces]]
:imagesdir: chapters/07-gui-basics/images
== Simple Graphical User Interfaces

=== Problem: Codon extractor

Recall from Chapter REF=chapter:Repetition that we can record DNA as a
sequence of nucleotide bases A, C, G, and T. Using this idea, we can
represent any sequence of DNA using a `String` made up of those four
letters, such as `"ATGGAAGTATTTAAATAG"`.

This particular sequence contains 18 bases and six _codons_. A codon is
a three-base subsequence in DNA. Biologists are interested in dividing
DNA into codons because a single codon usually maps to the production of
a specific amino acid. Amino acids, in turn, are the building blocks of
proteinS. The DNA sequence above contains the six codons ATG, GAA, GTA,
TTT, AAA, and TAG.

We want to write a program that extracts codons in order from DNA
sequences entered by the user. The program must detect and inform the
user of invalid DNA sequences (those containing letters other than the
four bases). If the user enters a DNA sequence whose length is not a
multiple of three, the final codon should be written with one or two
asterisks (`*`), representing the missing bases.

With your knowledge of `String` manipulation and loops, this problem
should be easy. However, we want to solve it with a _graphical user
interface_, not with the command line interaction we have emphasized in
previous chapters. That is, the input step should be done with a window
that looks similar to the following.

.Input window to prompt the user.
image::codoninput.png[]


And the corresponding output should look very much like this.

.Output window displaying results.
image::codonoutput.png[]


[[GUIBasicsIntroductionSection]]
=== Concepts: User interaction

Many computer programs communicate with a human user. There are at least
two ways in which this communication can happen. One way is to use
command line input and output. In this case, a program prompts the user
for an input and the user responds through the keyboard, usually
completing the response by pressing the `<return>` or `<enter>` key.
Another way to communicate is to use a graphical user interface or GUI.
(Some people pronounce "`GUI`" to sound like "`gooey,`" but others say
"`G-U-I.`") In this case, the program displays a window consisting of
one or more _widgets_, such as a button labeled "`OK`" or a text box in
which the user can type some text. Widgets (also known as controls) can
include buttons, labels, text areas, check boxes, menus, and many other
pre-defined objects for user interaction. While the program waits for
the user or does something in the background, the user has the option of
using a combination of the keyboard and the mouse to respond to the
program. While command line interfaces were dominant until the mid-70s,
GUIs have become the prime mode of communication between a program and a
human user. This chapter focuses on the design of simple GUIs using a
few built-in Java classes. Chapter REF=chapter:Constructing Graphical
User Interfaces introduces more advanced tools for constructing complex
GUIs.

.User interaction with a Java application (a) through a command line interface and (b) through a graphical user interface.
image::applicationInterface.png[]


==== Begin Example:

Figure REF=applicationInterfaceFigure(a) shows a Java application
interacting with a user through a command line interface. The
application asks the user for a temperature value in degrees Fahrenheit,
converts it to the equivalent Celsius, displays it, and prompts the user
to enter another value. Figure REF=applicationInterfaceFigure(b) shows a
similar application interacting with the user through a GUI. In this
case, the application creates a window with five widgets (two text boxes
and three buttons). The user enters a temperature value in the text box
below either the Centigrade label or the Fahrenheit label and presses
the appropriate Convert button. In turn the application displays the
equivalent temperature in the other text box.

==== End Example

We describe the GUIs we will introduce in this chapter as simple because
several aspects of GUI creation are hidden by the methods we will use.
For example, these GUIs do not require the programmer to handle the
details of events such as a user pressing an "`OK`" button or typing
text into a text box and pressing the `<enter>` key. These events will
be handled automatically by the tools we will introduce in this chapter.
Chapter REF=chapter:Constructing Graphical User Interfaces discusses the
creation of more complex GUIs that require the programmer to program
event handling explicitly.

[[syntax:Dialogs_and_the_JOptionPane_class]]
=== Syntax: Dialogs and the `JOptionPane` class

`JOptionPane` is a utility class for creating GUIs consisting most often
of a single dialog. It offers a variety of ways to create useful dialogs
quickly and easily and is part of the larger Java Swing GUI library. In
this chapter, we will show you how to use the static methods and
constants in `JOptionPane` to construct useful dialogs. Specifically,
you will learn how to construct the following four types of dialogs.

Information:::
  An information, or message, dialog displays a message to the user.
  Static method `showMessageDialog()` creates such a dialog. See
  Figure REF=simpleMessageFigure for an example of a message dialog.
Confirm:::
  A confirm dialog asks a user to confirm a statement. Static method +
  `showConfirmDialog()` creates such a dialog. This dialog may return
  user input as `YES\_OPTION`, `NO\_OPTION`, `OK\_OPTION`, or
  `CANCEL\_OPTION`. See Figure REF=yes-noDialogFigure for an example of
  a Yes-No dialog.
Option:::
  An option dialog asks the user to select one from an arbitrary set of
  options. Static method `showOptionDialog()` creates such a dialog. See
  Figure REF=CapitalDialogFigure for an example.
Input:::
  An input dialog is useful for obtaining data provided by the user.
  Static method `showInputDialog()` creates such a dialog. The user can
  input a `String` that might represent a number, a name, or any
  arbitrary piece of text. See Figure REF=inputDialogFigure for an
  example.

The `JOptionPane` class can be used to create both _modal_ and
_non-modal_ dialogs. A modal dialog is one that forces the user to
interact with the dialog before the program can continue. Thus, the
dialog is dismissed and the program execution resumes only after the
user has responded. Modal dialogs are useful in situations where user
input is required for the program to proceed further.

A non-modal dialog is one that is displayed on the screen and does not
require the user to interact with it for the underlying program to
proceed. It is easy to create a modal dialog using the static methods in
the `JOptionPane` class mentioned earlier. Creation of non-modal dialogs
requires a bit more effort and is not covered in this chapter. In the
remainder of this chapter we show how to use `JOptionPane` to create
various types of modal dialogs.

[[informationMessageDialog]]
==== Generating an information dialog

Often programs need to generate a message for the user and request a
response. The message might be a short piece of information, and the
only response might be "`OK.`" The message might be more complex and
require a more thoughtful response. In this section, we show how the
Java utility class `JOptionPane` can generate a simple dialog whose sole
purpose is to inform the user that a task has been completed. The next
example shows how to generate such a dialog.

==== Begin Example:

Program REF=program:SimpleDialog creates a dialog to inform the user
that the task it was assigned to perform is now complete.
Figure REF=simpleMessageFigure shows the dialog generated by this
program.

.Program to generate a simple dialog.
[source, java, linenums]
----
include::programs/SimpleDialog.java[]
----

Let’s dissect Program REF=program:SimpleDialog. Line REF=importSwing is
needed to import classes used in this program. The `swing` package
contains a number of classes needed to create a GUI, and `JOptionPane`
is one such class. If you try to compile the program without
line REF=importSwing, it will fail.

.A simple dialog generated using `JOptionPane`.
image::simpleMessageFigure.png[]


In Figure REF=simpleMessageFigure the dialog titled "`Simple Dialog`"
includes an icon, a message and a button labeled "`OK.`" This dialog is
actually a _frame_, which is what windows are called in Java. We will
discuss frames in greater detail in Section REF=syntax:GUIs in Java.

Note that the appearance of the dialog may be different on your
computer. Even though Java is platform independent, GUIs are customized
based on the OS you are running. Each OS has a default _look and feel_
(L & F) manager that specifies how widgets look and behave in your
program. You can change the L&F manager, but not all managers are
available on all operating systems.

Line REF=showMessageDialogLine and the next two lines use a static
method to create a modal dialog. `JOptionPane` is a utility class and
`showMessageDialog()` is a static method in this class. This method,
along with the other three `JOptionPane` methods we discuss in this
chapter is a _factory method_, meaning that it creates a new object (in
this case some kind of dialog object) on the fly with specific
attributes. In this example, the program is informing the user that a
task has been completed. The method has the following four parameters.

Component:::
  The parent component in which the dialog is displayed. We use `null`
  in this example, which causes a default frame to be used, centering
  the dialog in the screen.
Message:::
  The message to be displayed. In this example, we have +
  `"Task completed. Click OK to exit."`
Title:::
  The title string used to decorate the dialog. In this example, it is
  `"A Simple Dialog"`.
Message Type:::
  The type of the message to be displayed. In this example, we use the
  constant `INFORMATION\_MESSAGE`.
Icon:::
  The icon to be displayed in the dialog. If you have an object of type
  `Icon`, you can use it to customize your dialog. The
  `showMessageDialog()` is an overloaded method that can take several
  different sets of parameters. In this example, we used a version of
  the method that does not specify an icon.

Line REF=displayMessageLine displays a message on the console which is
not needed in this program but illustrates an interesting point. When
you run `SimpleDialog`, you will notice that the `“Done.”` message
displays on the console only after you have clicked the "`OK`" button in
the dialog box. This is the modal behavior we mentioned earlier. The
dialog blocks execution of the thread that generated it.

==== End Example

In the above example, we have displayed a message of type
`INFORMATION\_MESSAGE`. These are additional message types that could be
used.

* `ERROR\_MESSAGE`
* `PLAIN\_MESSAGE`
* `QUESTION\_MESSAGE`
* `WARNING\_MESSAGE`

When used as parameters in `showMessageDialog()`, the constants above
cause different default icons to be displayed in the dialog box.
Figure REF=iconsInMessageDialogsFigure shows dialogs generated by
`showMessageDialog()` when using `JOptionPane.ERROR\_MESSAGE`, (left)
and `JOptionPane.WARNING\_MESSAGE` (right). Note the difference in the
icons displayed towards the top left of the two dialogs.

.Two dialogs generated using the `showMessageDialog()` method. The left dialog uses `JOptionPane.ERROR\_MESSAGE`, and the right uses `JOptionPane.WARNING\_MESSAGE`. The only difference is the icon displayed.
image::iconsinMessageDialogsFigure.png[]


[[yes-noDialog]]
==== Generating a Yes-No confirm dialog

There are situations when a program needs to obtain a binary answer from
the user, a "`yes`" or a "`no.`" The next example shows how to generate
such a dialog and how to get the user’s response.

==== Begin Example: Yes-No dialog

Consider a program that checks whether a student understands the
difference between odd and even integers. The program generates a random
integer latexmath:[x], presents it to the user, and asks the question,
"`Is latexmath:[x] an odd integer?`" The answer given by the user is
checked for correctness, and the user is informed accordingly.
Program REF=program:OddEvenTest shows how to use the `JOptionPane` class
to generate a dialog for such an interaction.

.Program that tests knowledge of odd and even integers with a Yes-No dialog.
[source, java, linenums]
----
include::programs/OddEvenTest.java[]
----

Program REF=program:OddEvenTest begins by declaring a random number
generator named `random`. It then generates a random number and presents
it to the user in a dialog created at line REF=yes-noDialogLine. Note
the use of `JOptionPane.YES\_NO\_OPTION` as the last parameter in the
`showConfirmDialog()` method at line REF=yes-noDialogLine. The generated
dialog is shown in Figure REF=yes-noDialogFigure(a). A second dialog is
shown with a message dependent on whether the user gives the correct
answer. The two different versions of this dialog are shown in
Figure REF=yes-noDialogFigure(b) and (c). Note that a call to
`showConfirmDialog()` at line REF=yes-noDialogLine returns the
`JOptionPane.YES\_OPTION` or the `JOptionPane.NO\_OPTION` value
depending on whether the user clicked the "`Yes`" or "`No`" button.

==== End Example

.(a) A Yes-No dialog generated using `JOptionPane`. (b) Dialog in response to correct answer. (c) Dialog in response to incorrect answer.
image::yes-noDialogFigure.png[]


Because we used `YES\_NO\_OPTION`, the dialog in
Example REF=example:Yes-No dialog automatically generates two buttons
labeled "`Yes`" and "`No.`" Dialogs can also use the
`YES\_NO\_CANCEL\_OPTION` to generate a dialog with "`Yes,`" "`No,`" and
"`Cancel`" options. The return value from `showConfirmDialog()` is
`CANCEL\_OPTION` if the user presses the "`Cancel`" button. .

==== Generating a dialog with a list of options

The `JOptionPane` class can also be used to generate an arbitrary set of
options as shown in the next example.

==== Begin Example:

Consider a program that asks the user to select the correct capital of a
country from a given list of capitals. It shows three options and asks
the user to select one from among the three. It then checks the user
response for correctness and displays a suitable message.
Program REF=program:CapitalQuiz performs these tasks. In this program,
we call the `showOptionDialog()` method at line REF=multipleOptionsLine
to create a dialog with multiple options. In our case, the options are
three names of capitals, and only one of them is correct.
Figure REF=CapitalDialogFigure shows the dialog created.

.Program to generate a dialog with programmer-defined options.
[source, java, linenums]
----
include::programs/CapitalQuiz.java[]
----

.A dialog with programmer-defined options generated by Program REF=program:CapitalQuiz.
image::selectCapitalDialogFigure.png[]


The `showOptionDialog()` method creates an options dialog, which is the
most complicated (but also the most flexible) of all the dialogs. The
array of `String` values provided as the second to last parameter to
`showOptionDialog()` gives the labels for the buttons.

There are three `null` values passed into the method on
line REF=multipleOptionsLine in Program REF=program:CapitalQuiz. The
first one functions like the `null` used in
Program REF=program:OddEvenTest, specifying that the default frame
should be used. The second specifies that the default icon should be
used. In the next section, we will show how to specify a custom icon.
The last parameter indicates the default button, which will have focus
when the dialog is created. If the user hits `<enter>` instead of
clicking, the button with focus is the button that will be pressed.

==== End Example

[[customIconDialog]]
==== Generating a dialog with a custom icon

A custom icon can be included in any dialog. Each of the methods in
`JOptionPane` introduced earlier can take an icon as a parameter. The
next example illustrates how to do so.

==== Begin Example:

Program REF=program:CustomIconDialog shows how to use
`showMessageDialog()` to generate a message dialog with a custom icon.
Note the last parameter at line REF=customIconLine. This parameter
creates a new `ImageIcon` object from the `file` `String` (`"bat.png"`
in this case). The resulting dialog appears in
Figure REF=customIconDialogFigure. Dialogs illustrated in earlier
examples can also use an icon parameter to include a custom icon.

.A dialog with a custom icon generated by Program REF=program:CustomIconDialog.
image::customIconDialogFigure.png[]


.Program to generate a dialog with a custom icon.
[source, java, linenums]
----
include::programs/CustomIconDialog.java[]
----

Note that the icon shown above will not appear when you run this code
unless you have a copy of `bat.png` in the same directory.

==== End Example

[[inputDialog]]
==== Generating an input dialog

An input dialog can read text data from the user. The
`showInputDialog()` method in the `JOptionPane` class allows us to
create such a dialog. We introduced the `showInputDialog()` method in
Section REF=syntax:Java basics, but we give two more examples here to
emphasize its similarity to the other `JOptionPane` factory methods and
to show off some of its additional features.

==== Begin Example: Input dialog

We want to write a program that asks a question about basic chemistry.
Program REF=program:ChemistryQuizOne shows how to display a question,
obtain an answer from the user, check for the correctness of the answer,
and report back to the user. At line REF=chemistryInputDialogLineOne,
the `showInputDialog()` method is used to generate the dialog shown in
Figure REF=chemistryQuizFigure(a). This method returns a `String` named
`response` containing the text entered by the user in the dialog box. At
line REF=chemistryConvertToIntegerLineOne, this `String` is converted to
an `int` and saved into variable `answer`. This value is checked against
the correct answer, and the `showMessageDialog()` method informs the
user whether or not the answer is correct.

It is important to note that the user could type any sequence of
characters in the dialog box. Try running
Program REF=program:ChemistryQuizOne and see what happens when you type
"`two,`" instead of the number "`2,`" into the dialog box and press the
"`OK`" button. The program will generate an exception indicating that
the input `String` cannot be converted to an integer.
Exercise REF=exercise:inputDialogExceptionExercise asks you to modify
Program REF=program:ChemistryQuizOne so it gracefully handles such
exceptions.

.Program to generate a dialog to input data as text.
[source, java, linenums]
----
include::programs/ChemistryQuizOne.java[]
----

.(a) A dialog requesting input as text. (b) A dialog requesting a selection from a list of choices. These dialogs are generated by Programs REF=program:ChemistryQuizOne and REF=program:ChemistryQuizTwo, respectively.
image::inputDialogFigure.png[]


[[inputDialogFigure]][inputDialogFigure]

==== End Example

==== Begin Example: Input dialog with a list

In Example REF=example:Input dialog the user is required to enter a
single value. To reduce input errors, we can restrict the user to
picking from a predefined list. We can create this list by generating an
array and supplying it as a parameter to the `showInputDialog()` method.

Program REF=program:ChemistryQuizTwo displays a list of chemical
elements and asks the user to select the heaviest.
Line REF=chemistryInputDialogListLineTwo passes an array of four
`String` values to the `showInputDialog()` method. Note that the last
parameter to this method is `null` indicating that no specific item on
the list should be selected by default. (In this case, the first item in
the list is initially selected.) The generated dialog is shown in
Figure REF=chemistryQuizFigure(b). The four elements are contained in a
drop down list.

.Program to generate a dialog to input a choice from a list.
[source, java, linenums]
----
include::programs/ChemistryQuizTwo.java[]
----

Unlike Example REF=example:Input dialog, the return value from
`showInputDialog()` is now of type `Object`, not of type `String`. The
type of the list required by the method is `Object` array. (You can pass
a `String` array to a method that wants an `Object` array due to
inheritance, which is further discussed in
Chapters REF=chapter:Inheritance and REF=chapter:Polymorphism.) The
return value is the specific object from the array that was passed in.
In our case, it *has* to be a `String`, but Java is not smart enough to
figure that out. For this reason, we cast the object to a `String`
before using the `equals()` method.

==== End Example

==== Begin Example: Input dialog with a long list

.A dialog requesting user to select one item from a list of 20 data items. Note the use of a scroll down list to display the items.
image::inputDialogListManyItemsFigure.png[]


When the number of elements in the list supplied to the
`showInputDialog()` is 20 or more, a `JList` object is automatically
used to display the items as shown in
Figure REF=inputDialogListManyItemsFigure.

Other than a longer list, the code in this example is virtually
identical to the code for Example REF=example:Input dialog with a list.

==== End Example

=== Solution: Codon extractor

Here we give the solution to the codon extractor problem posed at the
beginning of the chapter. As we have done throughout this chapter, we
start with the import needed for GUIs built on the Swing framework. Next
we begin the `CodonExtractor` class and its `main()` method. For
readability, the solution to this problem is divided into methods that
each do a specific task. We hope that the way a method works is
intuitively clear to you. If not, the next chapter explains them in
detail.

[source,numberLines,java]
----
import javax.swing.*;

public class CodonExtractor {
	public static void main(String [] args) {       
		int continueProgram;
        do {
        	// Read DNA sequence
            String input = JOptionPane.showInputDialog(
            		"Enter a DNA sequence");/*@\label{DNAInputLine}@*/
            input = input.toUpperCase(); // Make upper case
			String message = "Do you want to continue?";
            if( isValid(input) ) // Check for validity 
                displayCodons(input); // Find codons
            else
				message = "Invalid DNA Sequence.\n" + message;
			continueProgram = JOptionPane.showConfirmDialog(
				null, message, "Alert", JOptionPane.YES_NO_OPTION);            
        } while(continueProgram == JOptionPane.YES_OPTION);
        JOptionPane.showMessageDialog(null,
        	"Thanks for using the Codon Extractor!");  
    }
----

The `main()` method contains a `do-while` loop that allows the user to
enter sequences repeatedly. The `showInputDialog()` method makes an
input dialog and returns the `String` the user enters. The
`toUpperCase()` method converts the `String` to upper case, allowing us
to read input in either case.

We then call the `isValid()` method to make sure that the user entered a
valid DNA sequence. If it is valid, we use `displayCodons()` to display
the codons in the sequence. Either way, we use a `showConfirmDialog()`
method to creating a confirm dialog, asking the user if he or she wants
to continue entering sequences. The loop will continue as long as the
return value is `JOptionPane.YES\_OPTION`.

[source,numberLines,java]
----
    public static boolean isValid( String DNA ) {
        String validBases = "ACGT";                
        for( int i = 0; i < DNA.length(); i++) {
			char base = DNA.charAt(i);
            if( validBases.indexOf( base ) == -1 )			
				return false; //base not in "ACGT"
        }        
        return true;
    }
----

The `isValid()` method checks to see if the DNA contains only the
letters representing the four bases. To do this, we use the Java
`String` library cleverly: We loop through the characters in our input,
checking to see where they can be found in `"ACGT"`. If the index
returned is -1, the character was not found, and the DNA is invalid.

[source,numberLines,java]
----
    public static void displayCodons(String DNA) {                
        String message = "";
		// Get as many complete codons as possible
        for (int i = 0; i < DNA.length() - 2; i += 3)
            message += "\n" + DNA.substring(i, i + 3);
		// 1-2 bases might be left over
        int remaining = DNA.length() % 3;        
        if( remaining == 1 )
            message += "\n"+ DNA.substring(DNA.length() - 1,
            	DNA.length()) + "**"; 
        else if( remaining == 2 )
            message += "\n"+ DNA.substring(DNA.length() - 2,
            	DNA.length()) + "*";
        message = "DNA length: " + DNA.length() +
        	"\n\nCodons: " + message;
        JOptionPane.showMessageDialog(null, message,
        	"Codons in DNA", JOptionPane.INFORMATION_MESSAGE);/*@\label{codonDisplayLine2}@*/   
    }
}
----

In the `displayCodons()` method, we display the individual codons to the
user. We build a large `String` with newlines separating each codon. To
do so, we loop through the input, jumping ahead three characters each
time. If the input length is not a multiple of three, we pad with
asterisks. Finally, we use the `showMessageDialog()` method to display
an information dialog with the list of codons.

=== Concurrency: Simple GUIs

Many GUI frameworks (including Swing) are built on a multi-threaded
model. Swing uses threads to redraw widgets and listen for user input
while the main thread can continue processing other data.

In this chapter, the impact of these threads is minimal because we used
only *modal* dialogs. Every time we called a `JOptionPane` method, the
execution of the program’s main thread had to wait until the method
returned. As it turns out, several threads are created when
`showInputDialog()` or any of the others dialog methods are called, but
they do not interact with the main thread since it has been blocked.

The situation is more complicated with a non-modal dialog, which is one
of the reasons we did not go into them. In a non-modal dialog, the
threads that redraw the dialog and handle its events (like a user
clicking on a button) are running at the same time as the thread that
created the dialog. Since many threads are running, it is possible for
them to write to the same data at the same time. Doing so can lead to
inconsistencies such as the ones we will describe in
Chapter REF=chapter:Synchronization.

The GUIs we will create in Chapter REF=chapter:Constructing Graphical
User Interfaces, however, will be more than dialogs. They will be fully
functional windows, known as frames in Java. Like a non-modal dialog,
the creation of a frame does not block the thread that created it.

Many applications launch a frame and then end their main thread. If no
other threads are created, life is relatively easy. However, complex
applications may create multiple frames or launch threads to work on
tasks in the background. Another common problem is caused by performing
complicated tasks in the event handler for a GUI. If a task takes too
long, the GUI can freeze or become unresponsive, as you have probably
experienced. The fact that this problem happens so frequently even in
the latest operating systems should hint at the difficulty of managing
GUI threads.

When we describe how to create fully featured GUIs in
Chapter REF=chapter:Constructing Graphical User Interfaces, we will also
give some techniques to help with avoiding unresponsive GUIs in a
multi-threaded environment.

=== Summary

In this chapter we have introduced a way to create simple GUIs. These
GUIs are created using various methods available in the `JOptionPane`
class. While the interfaces created this way are simple in nature, they
are often adequate for input and output in short Java programs.
Construction of more complex GUIs is the subject of
Chapter REF=chapter:Constructing Graphical User Interfaces.

=== Exercises

1.  In which situations would it be better to use a command-line
interface instead of a GUI? When is it better to use a GUI over a
command-line interface?
2.  <<exercise:modalNonmodalDialogExercise>> Explain the difference
between a modal and a non-modal dialog. Give an example of when you
would prefer a modal over non-modal dialog, and another example of when
you would prefer a non-modal to a modal dialog.
3.  <<exercise:messageTypeConstantsExercise>> Give one example each when
you would use the five different message type constants in
`showMessageDialog()` method (see page  for a listing of the five
constants).
4.  <<exercise:yesNoDialogExercise>> In Program REF=program:OddEvenTest,
we could have coded line REF=yes-noDialogLine as follows without
changing the program behavior.
+
....
if( (response == 0 && x % 2 != 0) ||
    (response == 1 && x % 2 == 0) )
....
+
Yet another option is below.
+
....
if( response != x % 2 )
....
+
Which of these three implementations is best? Why?
+
*Programming Practice*
5.  Modify the program in Example REF=example:Yes-No dialog such that it
tests the user several times, say 25 times, whether a randomly generated
integer is odd or even. The program should keep a score indicating the
number of correct answers. At the end of the test the score is displayed
using a suitable dialog.
6.  Modify the program in Example REF=example:Yes-No dialog such that it
displays a dialog that asks the user "`Do you wish to continue?`" and
offers options "`Yes`" and "`No.`" The program exits the loop when the
"`No`" option is selected and displays the score using a suitable
dialog.
7.  <<exercise:cancelButtonExercise>> Rewrite
Program REF=program:OddEvenTest so that the confirmatory dialog
generated offers the "`Yes,`" "`No,`" and "`Cancel`" options to the
user. The program exits with a message dialog saying "`Thank You`" when
the user selects the "`Cancel`" option.
8.  <<exercise:CapitolDialogExercise>> Modify
Program REF=program:CapitalQuiz to create and administer a test wherein
the user is asked capitals of 10 countries in a sequence. The program
must keep count of the score, i.e., the number of correct answers.
Inform the user of the score at the end of the test using a suitable
dialog.
9.  <<exercise:focusOptionExercise>> Modify line REF=multipleOptionsLine
in Program REF=program:CapitalQuiz so that the button labeled "`Baku`"
has focus.
10. <<exercise:randomizeCapitalsExercise>> Section REF=solution:Three
card poker gives a method called `shuffle()` that is used to randomize
an array representing a deck of cards. Adapt this code and modify
Program REF=program:CapitalQuiz so that the order of the capitals is
randomized. Note that you will have to record which index contains the
correct answer.
11. Re-implement the solution to the college cost calculator problem
given in Section REF=solution:College cost calculator so that it uses
GUIs constructed with `JOptionPane` for input and output.
12. Re-implement the solution to the Monty Hall problem given in
Section REF=solution:Monty Hall so that it uses GUIs constructed with
`JOptionPane` for input and output.
13. Re-implement the solution to the DNA searching problem given in
Section REF=solution:DNA searching so that it uses GUIs constructed with
`JOptionPane` for input and output.
14. Write a program that creates an input dialog that prompts and reads
a file name of an image from the user. Then, create an information
dialog that displays the file as a custom icon. In this way, you can
construct a simple image viewer.
15. <<exercise:inputDialogExceptionExercise>> *Note: You should attempt
this exercise only if you are familiar with exceptions in Java.
Exceptions are covered in Chapter REF=chapter:Exceptions.* +
Use the `try-catch` block and modify
Program REF=program:ChemistryQuizOne so that it handles an exception
generated when the user enters a string that cannot be converted to an
integer. In the event such an exception is raised, pop up a message
dialog box informing the user to try again and type an integer value.
When the user responds by clicking the "`OK`" button on this message
box, the input dialog box should appear once again and offer the user
another chance at the answer. Write two versions of the modified
program. In one version, your program should give only one chance for
input after an incorrect string has been typed. In another version, your
program should remain in a loop until the user enters a valid integer
(note that a valid integer might not be the correct answer to the
question asked).
